In this part of the series I'm going to try and rig the character in the last series.
I did it all manually because I think it's great to know how to rig manually before you start using
any automated tools the automated tools are fantastic.
If they work perfectly but if they don't then how do you go back and fix anything.
So you need to kind of know the fundamentals before you can actually troubleshoot anything on an automated
rigging system.
So for this character I think what I'd like to do is use the rigor Phi add on.
It's been a while since I've used it.
There have been a few updates since then so I thought I'd take a look at it.
The first thing you may need to do is add the add on install the add on.
So let's go over here to file user preferences.
And in this window let's click on the add ons button and I'm going to type in rigor Phi.
There it is.
You should come up with this entry here.
Now mine has already checked but if yours isn't you just need to add a checkmark here and then click
save user settings and then we should be good to go.
So before we add the rig by rig into the scene let's make sure that the character is is prepared for
rigging.
I'm going to hit the key and let's go take a look at the transforms here.
It turns out that my transforms look pretty good.
I've got zeroes in location zeros in rotation and ones in scale and that's pretty good.
My guess is that he's going to be too big.
This is about 25 meters tall here.
So when the rig of five rig comes in it's going to be a lot smaller and that's fine we can shrink him
down.
If your transforms aren't zeros and ones over here you can always select the character and press control
a and apply the location and then press controls again and apply the rotation and scale and that will
get all of these back to their zeros and ones.
Now let me take a look in the eyes here I've got eyes separate from the head or the main body so it
looks like that's all zeros and ones that's all zeros and ones.
OK so it looks like that's pretty good.
All right so let's go ahead and create the Omniture.
If I come over here to the Create tab and I scroll down and I click armature all I'm going to get is
a single bone.
So if I click this you can see if I zoom in way down here I'll hit the period key on the numpad And
if we zoom in all we get is just one ball.
And that's certainly the way you want to be in when you're doing it manually but that's not going to
help us a whole lot.
So I'm going to undo this with a control or command Z.
What we need to do instead of using the Create tab is use Shift A.
So to add the rig I'll press shift A and I'll choose armature.
And here's that single bone Here's the rigger fi rig and here's the new pitch you poi rig.
Now I haven't used this yet I think it was added as an option in version 2.7 for I believe and it includes
facial rig as well but we don't need that because this character really wasn't set up to open a mouth
or blink or anything.
So I'm just going to go ahead and use the rig a FI add on.
So our click human Metta rig and there we go.
And you notice that.
Yes sure enough the rig is really tiny.
So it's way down here.
So this is actually more reasonably sized in terms of real world scale.
The Blendr units are really pretty much meter's if we come over here to I believe the world know about
the scene here.
There we go if we come over to the scene you can see that in the unit's field we've got metric units
and imperial or inches and feet.
So if we go from the Blendr units here to metric you can see that nothing really changes it's just 1.9
meters.
If we change to imperial then the grid gets a little smaller.
Things change a little bit but the difference between metres and Blendr units is pretty much nothing.
So this is probably a good size to make our character.
If we're going to take it into a game engine.
All right.
So what I'm going to do now is scale my character down to fit that rig.
I'm going to go and select low poly character as well as the eyes and I'm to change the center of pivot
from the median point to the 3D cursor.
And just to make sure we're scaling from that point down there at the center of the grid and I'll just
scale everything down until I get it about the right size.
So let me come to wireframe with a Z key and let me scale down a little bit more.
Something like that.
Now if I select the rig and come over to the object display I can turn on x ray here and see it through
through the character.
Now I'll hit the three key and the five key to go to orthographic view and I'll take this character
as well as the eyes.
I'll switch back to medium point and I'll drag the character forward just a little bit something like
something like that.
I think that'll work.
Now once we've got once I've moved this character I'm going to have to now re-establish the center but
I think moving this forward just a little bit will save me some headache in setting up the rig.
Just trying to center up the hips and the neck along the side of the character here.
And that looks pretty good.
All right.
So if I select the character now I need to move this back into the center of the grid move this origin
point back to the center.
So I'll just go to tools and set origin and I'll say origin to 3D cursor and that'll pop that back into
the center and I'll do the same with the eyes.
I'll select these and put those into the center as well.
Now we need to make sure that our scale and our rotation and our location are all zeroed out.
So we've got zeros in the location and the rotation but not in the scale so unimpressed actually I'll
select all of these here and I'll press control a and let's apply the scale there we go that's what
we want.
So now if I select the character you can see that is 1.9 meters tall the transformations are all zeros
and ones and that's good.
All right so the next thing we need to do is get these joints in place so I'll select the rig go to
the front view here and it looks like I've still got my image there and look how big it is.
Let me scroll down and turn off or get rid of this image.
Here we go.
You don't need that.
All right so now that we've got the general shape or the general proportion of the character correct.
Let's go ahead and tab into edit mode for the rig here and what we need to do is come over here to the
options tab and turn on X mirror.
And what that'll do is that will allow us to move these joints around and have the other side come along.
So now what we need to do is actually just move these around and tell them in the proper place.
Now this is going to take a little time not too bad though.
I'm going to go ahead and start moving these back like this and if I go into wireframe and I'm going
to press the control key and click and drag I can select all of these joints and move them back a bit.
I'll select this and move it up to where the ankle should be.
And maybe these here and move those forward where the toes should be someone's going to move this up
to about the ball of the toe.
And then on and move this toe forward all the way like this.
I need to know where that edge is.
So what I'm going to do is go back to object mode and select the character and I'm going to come over
here to the object panel and turn on wires so that I can see where the edges are.
So now if I go back to the rig I can begin lining up these joints where the edges are that I want things
to bend that so I want this foot to bend at that edge so I'm going to put that joint right there.
Same thing applies here for this joint.
I need to figure out where the knees going to bend and it looks like it's going to bend at this joint
so I'll put it right there.
Now also notice there's a bit of a bend in the leg here.
When we turn on I.K. inverse kinematics that will allow us to grab one control at the foot here and
move the whole leg around.
And it needs to know which way the default bend is going to be if we put this chain exactly straight.
It's going to be a 50 50 chance as to which way the computer is going to bend the leg and if it bends
it backwards it's going to be painful.
So we want to put a bit of a bend in that joint to make sure that Blendr knows which way we want it
to bend.
All right I'm going to get this right here.
Come up to the front now and make sure everything's in place here once again I'll hit the Z key to go
into wireframe and I'll control click and drag this and just drag all these over so they're lined up
with the foot and we go.
Let's think about this.
Are these hips in the proper place.
They don't seem to be.
It seems to me like this whole bone can come down to bout where the waist is and it seems like these
should be able to come down as well.
Down to where the hip would be the hip joint to the leg that feels like it's a little bit better.
All right.
So how about this joint.
Where is it.
It's lining up along this edge here.
That's not bad.
I like that.
Now for the arms it looks like I could grab this whole chain here like so and maybe bring this whole
thing down to kind of where that shoulder joint would be.
And I could maybe rotated a hair and bring that down like this.
I'm just trying to place that shoulder joint right in there.
Now if I'd select these I can move these down a bit.
I'll see if I can grab these bones here and start moving them into the hand.
This is probably the most tedious part is getting all the hand joints in place or all the finger joints
in place.
I'm just trying to get this joint right on the edge right here at the wrist.
I think what I'm going to do is try and select these bones here and maybe scale them up just a hair.
So they're a little bit bigger.
So they fit into the hand a little bit better maybe a little bit more something like that.
There we go.
So now I've got to go through and align each of these joints up with the fingers and it takes a while
so I'll do that off camera here.
So what we'll do in the next video is once all the joints are in place will go back to object mode and
come over here to the armature panel and we're going to click generate down here in the rig 5 panel
and we'll see how it works.